# Prologue {#prologue}

## Why OCaml? {#why-ocaml}

Programming languages matter. They affect the reliability, security, and
efficiency of the code you write, as well as how easy it is to read,
refactor, and extend. The languages you know can also change how you think,
influencing the way you design software even when you're not using them.

We wrote this book because we believe in the importance of programming
languages, and that OCaml in particular is an important language to learn.
The three of us have been using OCaml in our academic and professional lives
for over 15 years, and in that time we've come to see it as a secret weapon
for building complex software systems. This book aims to make this secret
weapon available to a wider audience, by providing a clear guide to what you
need to know to use OCaml effectively in the real world.

What makes OCaml special is that it occupies a sweet spot in the space of
programming language designs. It provides a combination of efficiency,
expressiveness and practicality that is matched by no other language. That is
in large part because OCaml is an elegant combination of a set of language
features that have been developed over the last 40 years. These include:
[OCaml/key features of]{.idx}

- *Garbage collection* for automatic memory management, now a feature of
  almost every modern, high-level language.

- *First-class functions* that can be passed around like ordinary values, as
  seen in JavaScript, Common Lisp, and C#.

- *Static type-checking* to increase performance and reduce the number of
  runtime errors, as found in Java and C#.

- *Parametric polymorphism*, which enables the construction of abstractions
  that work across different data types, similar to generics in Java and C#
  and templates in <span class="keep-together">C++.</span>

- Good support for *immutable programming*, *i.e.*, programming without
  making destructive updates to data structures. This is present in
  traditional functional <span class="keep-together">languages</span> like
  Scheme, and is also found in distributed, big-data frameworks like Hadoop.

- *Type inference*, so you don't need to annotate every single variable in
  your program with its type. Instead, types are inferred based on how a
  value is used. Available in a limited form in C# with implicitly typed
  local variables, and in C++11 with its `auto` keyword.

- *Algebraic data types* and *pattern matching* to define and manipulate
  complex data structures. Available in Scala and F#.

Some of you will know and love all of these features, and for others they'll
be largely new, but most of you will have seen some of them in other
languages that you've used. As we'll demonstrate over the course of this
book, there is something transformative about having all these features
together and able to interact in a single language. Despite their importance,
these ideas have made only limited inroads into mainstream languages, and
when they do arrive there, like first-class functions in C# or parametric
polymorphism in Java, it's typically in a limited and awkward form. The only
languages that completely embody these ideas are
*statically typed, functional programming languages* like OCaml, F#, Haskell,
Scala, and Standard ML.[OCaml/benefits of]{.idx}

Among this worthy set of languages, OCaml stands apart because it manages to
provide a great deal of power while remaining highly pragmatic. The compiler
has a straightforward compilation strategy that produces performant code
without requiring heavy optimization and without the complexities of dynamic
just-in-time (JIT) compilation. This, along with OCaml's strict evaluation
model, makes runtime behavior easy to predict. The garbage collector is
*incremental*, letting you avoid large garbage collection (GC)-related
pauses, and *precise*, meaning it will collect all unreferenced data (unlike
many reference-counting collectors), and the runtime is simple and highly
portable.

All of this makes OCaml a great choice for programmers who want to step up to
a better programming language, and at the same time get practical work done.

### A Brief History {#a-brief-history}

OCaml was written in 1996 by Xavier Leroy, Jérôme Vouillon, Damien Doligez,
and Didier Rémy at INRIA in France. It was inspired by a long line of
research into ML starting in the 1960s, and continues to have deep links to
the academic community.[OCaml/history of]{.idx}

ML was originally the *meta language* of the LCF (Logic for Computable
Functions) proof assistant released by Robin Milner in 1972 (at Stanford, and
later at Cambridge). ML was turned into a compiler in order to make it easier
to use LCF on different machines, and it was gradually turned into a
full-fledged system of its own by the 1980s.

The first implementation of Caml appeared in 1987. It was created by
Ascánder Suárez and later continued by Pierre Weis and Michel Mauny. In
1990, Xavier Leroy and Damien Doligez built a new implementation called Caml
Light that was based on a bytecode interpreter with a fast, sequential
garbage collector. Over the next few years useful libraries appeared, such as
Michel Mauny's syntax manipulation tools, and this helped promote the use of
Caml in education and research teams.

Xavier Leroy continued extending Caml Light with new features, which resulted
in the 1995 release of Caml Special Light. This improved the executable
efficiency significantly by adding a fast native code compiler that made
Caml's performance competitive with mainstream languages such as C++. A
module system inspired by Standard ML also provided powerful facilities for
abstraction and made larger-scale programs easier to construct.

The modern OCaml emerged in 1996, when a powerful and elegant object system
was implemented by Didier Rémy and Jérôme Vouillon. This object system was
notable for supporting many common object-oriented idioms in a statically
type-safe way, whereas the same idioms required runtime checks in languages
such as C++ or Java. In 2000, Jacques Garrigue extended OCaml with several
new features such as polymorphic methods, variants, and labeled and optional
arguments.

The last decade has seen OCaml attract a significant user base, and language
improvements have been steadily added to support the growing commercial and
academic <span class="keep-together">codebases</span>. First-class modules,
Generalized Algebraic Data Types (GADTs), and dynamic linking have improved
the flexibility of the language. There is also fast native code support for
x86_64, ARM, PowerPC, and Sparc, making OCaml a good choice for systems where
resource usage, predictability, and performance all matter.

### The `Base` Standard Library {#the-core-standard-library}

However good it is, a language on its own isn't enough. You also need a set
of libraries to build your applications on. A common source of frustration
for those learning OCaml is that the standard library that ships with the
compiler is limited, covering only a subset of the functionality you would
expect from a general-purpose standard library. That's because the standard
library isn't really a general-purpose tool; its fundamental role is in
bootstrapping the compiler, and has been purposefully kept small and
portable.

Happily, in the world of open source software, nothing stops alternative
libraries from being written to supplement the compiler-supplied standard
library. `Base` is an example of such a library, and it's the standard
library we'll use through most of this book. [Base standard library]{.idx}

Jane Street, a company that has been using OCaml for more than 15 years,
developed the code in `Base` for its own internal use, but from the start
designed it with an eye toward being a general-purpose standard library. Like
the OCaml language itself, `Base` is engineered with correctness,
reliability, and performance in mind. It's also designed to be easy to
install and highly portable. As such, it works on every platform OCaml does,
including UNIX, Mac, Windows, and JavaScript.

`Base` is distributed with a set of syntax extensions that provide useful new
functionality to OCaml, and there are additional libraries that are designed
to work well with it, including `Core`, an extension to `Base` that includes
support for UNIX-specific APIs and a wealth of new data structures and tools;
and `Async`, a library for concurrent programming of the kind that often
comes up when building user interfaces or networked applications. All of
these libraries are distributed under a liberal Apache 2 license to permit
free use in hobby, academic, and commercial settings.

### The OCaml Platform {#the-ocaml-platform}

`Base` is a comprehensive and effective standard library, but there's much
more OCaml software out there. A large community of programmers has been
using OCaml since its first release in 1996, and has generated many useful
libraries and tools. We'll introduce some of these libraries in the course of
the examples presented in the book.[OCaml/third-party libraries for]{.idx}

The installation and management of these third-party libraries is made much
easier via a package management tool known as [OPAM](http://opam.ocaml.org/).
We'll explain more about OPAM as the book unfolds, but it forms the basis of
the Platform, which is a set of tools and libraries that, along with the
OCaml compiler, lets you build real-world applications quickly and
effectively.

We'll also use OPAM for installing the `utop` command-line interface. This is
a modern interactive tool that supports command history, macro expansion,
module completion, and other niceties that make it much more pleasant to work
with the language. We'll be using `utop` throughout the book to let you step
through the examples interactively.


## About This Book {#about-this-book}

*Real World OCaml* is aimed at programmers who have some experience with
conventional programming languages, but not specifically with statically
typed functional programming. Depending on your background, many of the
concepts we cover will be new, including traditional functional-programming
techniques like higher-order functions and immutable data types, as well as
aspects of OCaml's powerful type and module systems.

If you already know OCaml, this book may surprise you. Core redefines most of
the standard namespace to make better use of the OCaml module system and
expose a number of powerful, reusable data structures by default. Older OCaml
code will still interoperate with Core, but you may need to adapt it for
maximal benefit. All the new code that we write uses Core, and we believe the
Core model is worth learning; it's been successfully used on large,
multimillion-line codebases and removes a big barrier to building
sophisticated applications in OCaml.

Code that uses only the traditional compiler standard library will always
exist, but there are other online resources for learning how that works.
*Real World OCaml* focuses on the techniques the authors have used in their
personal experience to construct scalable, robust software systems.

### What to Expect {#what-to-expect}

*Real World OCaml* is split into three parts:

- Part I covers the language itself, opening with a guided tour designed to
  provide a quick sketch of the language. Don't expect to understand
  everything in the tour; it's meant to give you a taste of many different
  aspects of the language, but the ideas covered there will be explained in
  more depth in the chapters that follow.
  
  After covering the core language, Part I then moves onto more advanced
  features like modules, functors, and objects, which may take some time to
  digest. Understanding these concepts is important, though. These ideas will
  put you in good stead even beyond OCaml when switching to other modern
  languages, many of which have drawn inspiration from ML.

- Part II builds on the basics by working through useful tools and techniques
  for addressing common practical applications, from command-line parsing to
  asynchronous network programming. Along the way, you'll see how some of the
  <span class="keep-together">concepts</span> from Part I are glued together
  into real libraries and tools that combine different features of the
  language to good effect.

- Part III discusses OCaml's runtime system and compiler toolchain. It is
  remarkably simple when compared to some other language implementations
  (such as Java's or .NET's CLR). Reading this part will enable you to build
  very-high-performance systems, or to interface with C libraries. This is
  also where we talk about profiling and debugging techniques using tools
  such as GNU `gdb`.

### Installation Instructions {#installation-instructions}

*Real World OCaml* uses some tools that we've developed while writing this
book. Some of these resulted in improvements to the OCaml compiler, which
means that you will need to ensure that you have an up-to-date development
environment (using the 4.05.0 version of the compiler). The installation
process is largely automated through the OPAM package manager. Instructions
on how to it set up and what packages to install can be found at
[this Real World OCaml page](http://realworldocaml.org/install).[installation
instructions]{.idx}[OCaml/installation instructions]{.idx}

`Core` requires a UNIX based operating system, and so only works on systems
like Mac OS X, Linux, FreeBSD, and OpenBSD. Core includes a portable subset
called `Core_kernel` which works anywhere OCaml is, and in particular works
on Windows and Javascript. The examples in Part I of the book will only use
`Core_kernel` and other highly portable libraries.[OCaml/operating system
support]{.idx}

This book is not intended as a reference manual. We aim to teach you about
the language and about libraries tools and techniques that will help you be a
more effective OCaml programmer. But it's no replacement for API
documentation or the OCaml manual and man pages. You can find documentation
for all of the libraries and tools referenced in the book
[online](https://realworldocaml.org/doc).

### Code Examples {#code-examples}

All of the code examples in this book are available freely online under a
public-domain-like license. You are most welcome to copy and use any of the
snippets as you see fit in your own code, without any attribution or other
restrictions on their use.[OCaml/code examples for]{.idx}

The code repository is available online at
[<em class="hyperlink">https://github.com/realworldocaml/examples</em>](https://github.com/realworldocaml/examples).
Every code snippet in the book has a clickable header that tells you the
filename in that repository to find the source code, shell script, or
ancillary data file that the snippet was sourced from.

If you feel your use of code examples falls outside fair use or the
permission given above, feel free to contact us at
[_permissions@oreilly.com_](mailto:permissions@oreilly.com){.email}.


## Safari® Books Online {#safari-books-online}

::: safarienabled
Safari Books Online
([<em class="hyperlink">www.safaribooksonline.com</em>](http://my.safaribooksonline.com/?portal=oreilly){.orm:hideurl:ital})
is an on-demand digital library that delivers expert
[content](http://www.safaribooksonline.com/content){.orm:hideurl} in both
book and video form from the world’s leading authors in technology and
business. Technology professionals, software developers, web designers, and
business and creative professionals use Safari Books Online as their primary
resource for research, problem solving, learning, and certification training.
:::

Safari Books Online offers a range of
[product mixes](http://www.safaribooksonline.com/subscriptions){.orm:hideurl}
and pricing programs for
[organizations](http://www.safaribooksonline.com/organizations-teams){.orm:hideurl},
[government agencies](http://www.safaribooksonline.com/government){.orm:hideurl},
and
[individuals](http://www.safaribooksonline.com/individuals){.orm:hideurl}.
Subscribers have access to thousands of books, training videos, and
prepublication manuscripts in one fully searchable database from publishers
like O’Reilly Media, Prentice Hall Professional, Addison-Wesley
Professional, Microsoft Press, Sams, Que, Peachpit Press, Focal Press, Cisco
Press, John Wiley & Sons, Syngress, Morgan Kaufmann, IBM Redbooks, Packt,
Adobe Press, FT Press, Apress, Manning, New Riders, McGraw-Hill, Jones &
Bartlett, Course Technology, and dozens
[more](http://www.safaribooksonline.com/publishers){.orm:hideurl}. For more
information about Safari Books Online, please visit us
[online](http://www.safaribooksonline.com/){.orm:hideurl}.

## How to Contact Us {#how-to-contact-us}

Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:

::: {.simplelist}
- O’Reilly Media, Inc.

- 1005 Gravenstein Highway North

- Sebastopol, CA 95472

- 800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)

- 707-829-0515 (international or local)

- 707-829-0104 (fax)
:::


We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any
additional information. You can access this page at:

::: {.simplelist}
- [<em class="hyperlink">http://oreil.ly/realworldOCaml</em>](http://oreil.ly/realworldOCaml)
:::


To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to:

::: {.simplelist}
- [_bookquestions@oreilly.com_](mailto:bookquestions@oreilly.com){.email}
:::


For more information about our books, courses, conferences, and news, see our
website at
[<em class="hyperlink">http://www.oreilly.com</em>](http://www.oreilly.com).

Find us on Facebook:
[<em class="hyperlink">http://facebook.com/oreilly</em>](http://facebook.com/oreilly)

Follow us on Twitter:
[<em class="hyperlink">http://twitter.com/oreillymedia</em>](http://twitter.com/oreillymedia)

Watch us on YouTube:
[<em class="hyperlink">http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia</em>](http://www.youtube.com/oreillymedia)

## Contributors {#contributors}

We would especially like to thank the following individuals for improving
*Real World OCaml*:

- Leo White contributed greatly to the content and examples in
  [Objects](objects.html#objects){data-type=xref} and
  [Classes](classes.html#classes){data-type=xref}.

- Jeremy Yallop authored and documented the Ctypes library described in
  [Foreign Function Interface](foreign-function-interface.html#foreign-function-interface){data-type=xref}.

- Stephen Weeks is responsible for much of the modular architecture behind
  Core, and his extensive notes formed the basis of
  [Memory Representation Of Values](runtime-memory-layout.html#memory-representation-of-values){data-type=xref}
  and
  [Understanding The Garbage Collector](garbage-collector.html#understanding-the-garbage-collector){data-type=xref}.

- Jérémie Dimino, the author of `utop`, the interactive command-line
  interface that is used throughout this book. We're particularly grateful
  for the changes that he pushed through to make `utop` work better in the
  context of the book.

- Ashish Agarwal and Christoph Troestler worked on improving the book's
  toolchain. This allowed us to update the book to track changes to OCaml and
  various libraries and tools. Ashish also developed a new and improved
  version of the book's website.

- The many people who collectively submitted over 2400 comments to online
  drafts of this book, through whose efforts countless errors were found and
  fixed.

